README.md, before:

# DirectX11-Course

<img src="./DX11-logo.jpg">

Project generated while doing Sections 4-8 of the Udemy course *[The Complete Course of Microsoft DirectX 2024](https://www.udemy.com/course/directx-course/)* by 'The Tech Courses'.

The ['main' branch](https://github.com/AaronRuizMoraUK/DirectX11-Course/tree/main) contains a **Rendering Engine using DirectX 11** built from scratch following the course. It also contains additional improvements on top of the course content (see [DirectX Course Improvements](#DirectX-Course-Improvements) section).

The ['SimpleRenderer' branch](https://github.com/AaronRuizMoraUK/DirectX11-Course/tree/SimpleRenderer) contains a
**Simple DirectX 11 Renderer** that was generated during Sections 1-3 of the course.

<img src="./DX11-GraphicsEngine.gif">

## Build and Run

Requirements
- Graphics card with DirectX 11 support
- Microsoft Windows 
- Microsoft Visual Studio 2022
- CMake 3.28

Steps
- Clone repo
  ````
  git clone https://github.com/AaronRuizMoraUK/DirectX11-Course.git
  ````
- Generate Visual Studio solution using CMake in `build` folder
  ```` 
  cd DirectX11-Course
  mkdir build
  cd build
  cmake .. -G "Visual Studio 17 2022"
  ````
- Open `DirectX11-Course.sln` with Visual Studio
- Build and run `main` project

## Controls

Camera can be controlled while pressing the **right mouse button**:

- Use `WSAD` keys to move forward, backwards and sideways.
- Use `QE` keys to move upward and downwards
- Use mouse to rotate and pitch the camera.
- Use mouse wheel to speed up/down camera movement.

## Engine Architecture

The engine is divided in multiple projects.

| Project | Description |
| ------- | ----------- |
| **Core** | Library with **basic functionality** for the engine, like logging, debugging or the math data structures (vectors, matrices, transform, color, etc.) |
| **Graphics** | Library providing a generic graphics API encapsulating calls to DirectX 11 API. This is also known as the **Render Hardware Interface (RHI)**. The rest of the engine will communicate with this library and not with DirectX 11 directly. |
| **GraphicsTests** | Contains unit tests for Graphics library. |
| **Runtime** | This library contains more general constructs to build graphics applications, such as Window, Renderer, Camera or Assets. The renderer has an Scene with objects to render. |
| **EditorApplication** | Project with `main.cpp` that generates the executable. It creates an `Application`, which has a Window, a Renderer and a Camera. `Application` also creates objects and adds them to the renderer's scene. Finally, `Application` also runs the main loop, updating the camera and rendering the scene. |
| **Content** | This project contains the Assets folder, the main and 3rdParty CMake files and this *readme* file. |

## DirectX Course Improvements

I did the following improvements on top of the content provided in the DirectX 11 course:

- Used a **platform-independent math library** (**[mathfu](https://github.com/google/mathfu.git)**) instead of the DirectX Math library. This prevents the engine from being tied to a specific Graphics API, simplifying the effort to add support for other platforms in the future.
- Targets setup in CMake with 3 configurations:
  - **Debug**: No optimizations and debug information enabled. Asserts, logs and full debugging available.
  - **Development**: Optimizations and debug information enabled. Asserts, logs and partial debugging available with fast execution.
  - **Release**: Optimizations enabled and no debug information. Asserts, logs and debugging not available. Fastest execution.
- Fully **encapsulated DirectX 11** behind a separate library (Graphics). This simplifies the addition of other Graphics API in the future.
- Enabled **DirectX 11 Debug layer** when running in Debug configuration. Very useful to detect errors in DirectX and potential performance issues.
- Graphics device checks on destruction if there are device objects still being referenced and therefore leaking (missing to be destroyed).
- `SwapChain` supports ***Flip Discard*** technique with double buffering. This provides faster presentations since it flips between front and back buffer instead making a copy. The implementation allows any number of back buffers, default is 2.
- Support `Window` resizing when not in full screen mode. `SwapChain` and `FrameBuffer` are correctly resized as well.
- `FrameBuffer` supports both textures and typed buffers as render targets.
- Implemented the complete set of **Resource Views** (see **[DirectX 11 Resource table](https://github.com/AaronRuizMoraUK/DirectX12-Resources-Cheatsheet/blob/main/DirectX11.md)**)
    - `ShaderResourceView` supports multiple types of Textures (1D, 2D, 2DMS, 3D, Cube, Array) and Buffers (Typed, Structured, Raw).
    - `ShaderRWResourceView` (aka *Unordered Access View*) supports multiple types of Textures (1D, 2D, 3D, Array) and Buffers (Typed, Structured, Raw).
    - `RenderTargetView` supports multiple types of Textures (1D, 2D, 2DMS, 3D, Array) and Buffers (Typed)
    - `DepthStencilView` supports multiple types of Textures (1D, 2D, 2DMS, Array).
- `ShaderCompiler` is a separate class that generates shader bytecode and `Shader` will consume shader bytecode. This way `Shader` is not tied to an specific method of shader compilation, simplifying the effort to add support for *offline* shader compilation in the future.
- Assets only have generic data imported from the files in the Assets folder, they do not include DirectX or Graphics structures. For example, `TextureAsset` has a buffer (bytes) with the image imported from file, but it doesn't include a graphics' Texture. Another example is `MeshAsset`, it has the list of positions, indices, etc. imported from FBX or GLTF files, but it doesn't include a graphics' Buffer. This keeps the assets system nicely decoupled from graphics structures. Other classes (for example Renderer's `Object`) will use the assets, load their data and then construct their necessary structures from them.
- `MeshAsset` imports all meshes from the file and not just the first one.
- `Camera` just handles view/projection matrices and camera updates, it doesn't include any DirectX or Graphics structure. This decouples the camera from graphics. Instead, the renderer's scene will get the view/projection matrices from the camera and it's the scene's responsibility to update the constant buffers for the shaders.
- The main loop calculates the delta time of each frame and uses it to update the camera and the objects. This makes the application behave the same independently of the frame rate that it runs.
- Implemented [Blinn-Phong illumination model](https://learnopengl.com/Advanced-Lighting/Advanced-Lighting) in Pixel Shader.
- Implemented [Normal mapping](https://learnopengl.com/Advanced-Lighting/Normal-Mapping) to provide more detailed surfaces to objects.
- Implemented [Directional lighting](https://learnopengl.com/Lighting/Multiple-lights) in Pixel Shader.
- Applied [Gamma Correction](https://learnopengl.com/Advanced-Lighting/Gamma-Correction) in Pixel Shader for a better quality image due to more accurate lighting calculations in linear space.

In the last section of the course, where everything is coming together, I made a slightly different design:

- In order to know what resources the shaders expect and in what slots they should be bound to, the shader compiler gathers reflection data from the shader to provide a `ShaderResourceLayout`.
- The `Pipeline` class (which has the shaders for each stage: vertex, pixel, etc.) uses the `ShaderResourceLayout` from each shader to create a `PipelineResourceBindings` object. The pipeline produces `PipelineResourceBindings` objects which can be filled with resources by slot or by the variable name in the shader.
- `Renderer` handles the device, swap chain, main frame buffer and a scene.
- `PipelineObject` has the `Pipeline` and the binding of resources via several `PipelineResourceBindings` objects (per Scene, per Material, per Object).
- A `Scene` is what brings all together, handling a `PipelineObject`, the binding of resources and the drawing of all objects in the scene. It uses a `CommandList` to record all the commands asynchronously.
- `main.cpp` will instantiate an `Application`, which has the Window, the Renderer, the Camera and the Objects. It'll get the Scene from the renderer and add the objects and the camera to it. Finally, `Application` runs the main loop where it'll update the camera, render the scene and present it.

## 3rdParty Libraries

- **[glfw](https://github.com/glfw/glfw.git)**: Provides a simple, platform-independent API for creating windows, contexts and surfaces, reading input, handling events, etc.
- **[mathfu](https://github.com/google/mathfu.git)**: Provides a simple and efficient math library with vectors, matrices and quaternions classes.
- **[stb](https://github.com/nothings/stb.git)**: Provides several single-file graphics and audio libraries for C/C++. Used for loading images.
- **[assimp](https://github.com/assimp/assimp.git)**: Library to load various 3D file formats into a shared, in-memory format. Used for loading 3D meshes from FBX and GLTF files.

Commit message:

Adding controls to change the light direction and color in real time.

README.md, after:

# DirectX11-Course

<img src="./DX11-logo.jpg">

Project generated while doing Sections 4-8 of the Udemy course *[The Complete Course of Microsoft DirectX 2024](https://www.udemy.com/course/directx-course/)* by 'The Tech Courses'.

The ['main' branch](https://github.com/AaronRuizMoraUK/DirectX11-Course/tree/main) contains a **Rendering Engine using DirectX 11** built from scratch following the course. It also contains additional improvements on top of the course content (see [DirectX Course Improvements](#DirectX-Course-Improvements) section).

The ['SimpleRenderer' branch](https://github.com/AaronRuizMoraUK/DirectX11-Course/tree/SimpleRenderer) contains a
**Simple DirectX 11 Renderer** that was generated during Sections 1-3 of the course.

<img src="./DX11-GraphicsEngine.gif">

## Build and Run

Requirements
- Graphics card with DirectX 11 support
- Microsoft Windows 
- Microsoft Visual Studio 2022
- CMake 3.28

Steps
- Clone repo
  ````
  git clone https://github.com/AaronRuizMoraUK/DirectX11-Course.git
  ````
- Generate Visual Studio solution using CMake in `build` folder
  ```` 
  cd DirectX11-Course
  mkdir build
  cd build
  cmake .. -G "Visual Studio 17 2022"
  ````
- Open `DirectX11-Course.sln` with Visual Studio
- Build and run `main` project

## Controls

Camera can be controlled while pressing the **right mouse button**:

- Use `WSAD` keys to move forward, backwards and sideways.
- Use `QE` keys to move upward and downwards
- Use mouse to rotate and pitch the camera.
- Use mouse wheel to speed up/down camera movement.

Lighting controls:

- Use `1` to `5` to change the color of the light.
- Use `R` to set the lighting direction to the current look-at direction of the camera.

## Engine Architecture

The engine is divided in multiple projects.

| Project | Description |
| ------- | ----------- |
| **Core** | Library with **basic functionality** for the engine, like logging, debugging or the math data structures (vectors, matrices, transform, color, etc.) |
| **Graphics** | Library providing a generic graphics API encapsulating calls to DirectX 11 API. This is also known as the **Render Hardware Interface (RHI)**. The rest of the engine will communicate with this library and not with DirectX 11 directly. |
| **GraphicsTests** | Contains unit tests for Graphics library. |
| **Runtime** | This library contains more general constructs to build graphics applications, such as Window, Renderer, Camera or Assets. The renderer has an Scene with objects to render. |
| **EditorApplication** | Project with `main.cpp` that generates the executable. It creates an `Application`, which has a Window, a Renderer and a Camera. `Application` also creates objects and adds them to the renderer's scene. Finally, `Application` also runs the main loop, updating the camera and rendering the scene. |
| **Content** | This project contains the Assets folder, the main and 3rdParty CMake files and this *readme* file. |

## DirectX Course Improvements

I did the following improvements on top of the content provided in the DirectX 11 course:

- Used a **platform-independent math library** (**[mathfu](https://github.com/google/mathfu.git)**) instead of the DirectX Math library. This prevents the engine from being tied to a specific Graphics API, simplifying the effort to add support for other platforms in the future.
- Targets setup in CMake with 3 configurations:
  - **Debug**: No optimizations and debug information enabled. Asserts, logs and full debugging available.
  - **Development**: Optimizations and debug information enabled. Asserts, logs and partial debugging available with fast execution.
  - **Release**: Optimizations enabled and no debug information. Asserts, logs and debugging not available. Fastest execution.
- Fully **encapsulated DirectX 11** behind a separate library (Graphics). This simplifies the addition of other Graphics API in the future.
- Enabled **DirectX 11 Debug layer** when running in Debug configuration. Very useful to detect errors in DirectX and potential performance issues.
- Graphics device checks on destruction if there are device objects still being referenced and therefore leaking (missing to be destroyed).
- `SwapChain` supports ***Flip Discard*** technique with double buffering. This provides faster presentations since it flips between front and back buffer instead making a copy. The implementation allows any number of back buffers, default is 2.
- Support `Window` resizing when not in full screen mode. `SwapChain` and `FrameBuffer` are correctly resized as well.
- `FrameBuffer` supports both textures and typed buffers as render targets.
- Implemented the complete set of **Resource Views** (see **[DirectX 11 Resource table](https://github.com/AaronRuizMoraUK/DirectX12-Resources-Cheatsheet/blob/main/DirectX11.md)**)
    - `ShaderResourceView` supports multiple types of Textures (1D, 2D, 2DMS, 3D, Cube, Array) and Buffers (Typed, Structured, Raw).
    - `ShaderRWResourceView` (aka *Unordered Access View*) supports multiple types of Textures (1D, 2D, 3D, Array) and Buffers (Typed, Structured, Raw).
    - `RenderTargetView` supports multiple types of Textures (1D, 2D, 2DMS, 3D, Array) and Buffers (Typed)
    - `DepthStencilView` supports multiple types of Textures (1D, 2D, 2DMS, Array).
- `ShaderCompiler` is a separate class that generates shader bytecode and `Shader` will consume shader bytecode. This way `Shader` is not tied to an specific method of shader compilation, simplifying the effort to add support for *offline* shader compilation in the future.
- Assets only have generic data imported from the files in the Assets folder, they do not include DirectX or Graphics structures. For example, `TextureAsset` has a buffer (bytes) with the image imported from file, but it doesn't include a graphics' Texture. Another example is `MeshAsset`, it has the list of positions, indices, etc. imported from FBX or GLTF files, but it doesn't include a graphics' Buffer. This keeps the assets system nicely decoupled from graphics structures. Other classes (for example Renderer's `Object`) will use the assets, load their data and then construct their necessary structures from them.
- `MeshAsset` imports all meshes from the file and not just the first one.
- `Camera` just handles view/projection matrices and camera updates, it doesn't include any DirectX or Graphics structure. This decouples the camera from graphics. Instead, the renderer's scene will get the view/projection matrices from the camera and it's the scene's responsibility to update the constant buffers for the shaders.
- The main loop calculates the delta time of each frame and uses it to update the camera and the objects. This makes the application behave the same independently of the frame rate that it runs.
- Implemented [Blinn-Phong illumination model](https://learnopengl.com/Advanced-Lighting/Advanced-Lighting) in Pixel Shader.
- Implemented [Normal mapping](https://learnopengl.com/Advanced-Lighting/Normal-Mapping) to provide more detailed surfaces to objects.
- Implemented [Directional lighting](https://learnopengl.com/Lighting/Multiple-lights) in Pixel Shader.
- Applied [Gamma Correction](https://learnopengl.com/Advanced-Lighting/Gamma-Correction) in Pixel Shader for a better quality image due to more accurate lighting calculations in linear space.

In the last section of the course, where everything is coming together, I made a slightly different design:

- In order to know what resources the shaders expect and in what slots they should be bound to, the shader compiler gathers reflection data from the shader to provide a `ShaderResourceLayout`.
- The `Pipeline` class (which has the shaders for each stage: vertex, pixel, etc.) uses the `ShaderResourceLayout` from each shader to create a `PipelineResourceBindings` object. The pipeline produces `PipelineResourceBindings` objects which can be filled with resources by slot or by the variable name in the shader.
- `Renderer` handles the device, swap chain, main frame buffer and a scene.
- `PipelineObject` has the `Pipeline` and the binding of resources via several `PipelineResourceBindings` objects (per Scene, per Material, per Object).
- A `Scene` is what brings all together, handling a `PipelineObject`, the binding of resources and the drawing of all objects in the scene. It uses a `CommandList` to record all the commands asynchronously.
- `main.cpp` will instantiate an `Application`, which has the Window, the Renderer, the Camera and the Objects. It'll get the Scene from the renderer and add the objects and the camera to it. Finally, `Application` runs the main loop where it'll update the camera, render the scene and present it.

## 3rdParty Libraries

- **[glfw](https://github.com/glfw/glfw.git)**: Provides a simple, platform-independent API for creating windows, contexts and surfaces, reading input, handling events, etc.
- **[mathfu](https://github.com/google/mathfu.git)**: Provides a simple and efficient math library with vectors, matrices and quaternions classes.
- **[stb](https://github.com/nothings/stb.git)**: Provides several single-file graphics and audio libraries for C/C++. Used for loading images.
- **[assimp](https://github.com/assimp/assimp.git)**: Library to load various 3D file formats into a shared, in-memory format. Used for loading 3D meshes from FBX and GLTF files.
